# 0.3 COMPILING AND RUNNING

When writing a Pascal program for use with HiSoft Pascal you can type in your source text using the editor contained within the Pascal package or any editor that produces a pure ASCII text stream (each line ending with a **CR** and **LF** character pair) on tape or disc.

For example type the following immediately after you have loaded the Pascal (i.e. from within the integral editor), ending each line with the **Enter** key:

`I10,10` **Enter**

```
PROGRAM FACT;
VAR I:INTEGER;
	FUNCTION FACT(N:INTEGER):REAL;
	BEGIN
		IF N>1 THEN FACT:=N*FACT(N-1) ELSE FACT:=1
	END;
BEGIN
	REPEAT
		WRITE('FACTORIAL: ');
		READLN; READ(1);
		WRITELN(' IS ',FACT(I));
		WRITELN
	UNTIL FALSE
END.
```
STOP

`C` **Enter**

The source code will be compiled and assuming no errors are detected the object code will be created in memory. This can be run by simply typing:

`R` **Enter**

If there are any errors you should hit '**E**' to exit the compiler. Then use the editor to edit the program and correct the typing mistake.

When this program is run it will prompt you to enter numbers and give the factorial of each number input until you type **Stop** which will return you to the editor.

The compiler generates a listing of the form:

`xxxx nnnn text of source line`

where:  
	**xxxx** — is the address where the code generated by this line begins.  
	**nnnn** — is the line number with leading zeroes suppressed.

If a line contains more than **80** characters then the compiler inserts new-line characters so that the length of a line is never more than **80** characters.

The listing may be directed to a printer, if required, by the use of option `P+` (see [Section 3](man_s3-2-compile-options.md)).

You may pause the listing at any stage by pressing **Hold**; then use **Stop** to return to the editor or **Hold** again to continue the compilation.

if an error is detected during the compilation then the message '`*ERROR*`' will be displayed, followed by an up-arrow '**^**', which points after the symbol which generated the error, and an error number (see [Appendix 1](man_a1-errors.md)). The listing will pause; hit '**E**' to return to the editor to edit this line, '**P**' to return to the editor and edit the previous line (useful for missing semi-colons), **Stop** to abort, or any other key to continue the compilation. Normally it is best to use '**P**' or '**E**' on reaching the first error.

If the program terminates incorrectly (e.g. without '`END.`') then the message '`No more text`' will be displayed and control returned to the editor.

If the compiler runs out of table space the message '`No Table Space`' will be displayed and control returned to the editor. You should then use the editor's '**A**' command to increase the table size. See [Section 4](man_s4-int-editor.md) for details.

If a compilation contains any errors then the number of errors detected will be given and any object code produced will be deleted.

During a run of the object code various runtime error messages may be generated (see [Appendix 1](man_a1-errors.md)). You may suspend a run while it is outputting to the screen or printer by using **Hold**; subsequently use **Stop** to abort the run and return to the editor or **Hold** again to resume the run.

When using HiSoft Pascal the function keys are programmed as follows:

|Key Number|Without Shift|With Shift    |
|:--------:|:------------|:-------------|
|F1         |HELP *[ENTER]* |READ(         |
|F2         |PROGRAM      |WRITE(        |
|F3         |CONST *[ENTER]*|INTEGER       |
|F4         |TYPE *[ENTER]* |WRITELN       |
|F5         |VAR *[ENTER]*  |WHILE         |
|F6         |BEGIN *[ENTER]*|UNTIL         |
|F7         |END          |REPEAT *[ENTER]*|
|F8         |PROCEDURE    |FUNCTION      |
