# Introduction

[IS-DOS](../../software/ss-is-dos.md) is a disk-based disk operating system which is a powerful addition to your Enterprise computer. As well as providing useful utilities such as [DISKCOPY](../dos-commands/cmd-diskcopy.md), [BACKUP](../dos-commands/cmd-backup.md) and [UNDEL](../dos-commands/cmd-undel.md)ete, it allows the Enterprise to run the majority of application programs designed to operate under version 2.2 of the CP/M-80 operating system. The batch processing facilities of [EXDOS](../../software/ss-exdos.md) are also enhanced, and EXDOS commands can be issued from IS-DOS. Like EXDOS, IS-DOS uses the MS-DOS file structure, and files from both systems may be mixed on a single disk.

Any CP/M-80 program to be run on the Enterprise must be on an MS-DOS format disk; details are given later in this manual on how to configure programs to run under IS-DOS. It should be noted that certain programs "modify" CP/M during installation; it is not possible to run these programs under IS-DOS. Certain programs have been tested by Enterprise, and a list of these appears in an [appendix](isdos-pa3.md) at the rear of this manual. We will update this list periodically by producing an "applications note" which will be available on request. Obviously it is not possible for us to test all of the many CP/M programs available. We would ask users to supply us with any information they have on the operation (or non-operation) of specific packages that have not been tested by Enterprise.

(CP/M is a registered trademark of Digital Research and MS-DOS is a registered trademark of Microsoft.)

IMPORTANT: Make sure your master IS-DOS disk is write protected; refer to your EXDOS manual for information on write protecting disks. You are advised to make a copy of your IS-DOS disk as soon as possible (see [page 5](isdos-p1-starting.md)).